Add "Open Source Maintenance" blog post (#255)
simplabs/simplabs.github.io: blog/_posts/2018-11-27-open-source-maintenance.md

---
layout: article
section: Blog
title: "Open Source Maintenance"
author: "Tobias Bieniek"
github-handle: Turbo87
twitter-handle: tobiasbieniek
---

People often ask us how we can handle maintaining a large number of open-source
projects. In this blog post we will introduce you to some of the techniques we
have developed or discovered to simplify and speed up working on open-source
(and other) projects.

<!--break-->

<style>
code {
  white-space: nowrap;
}
</style>

> #### Git

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## An optimized workflow for maintainers
```
Adding this for better keyword placement.

Reviewer 2: @Turbo87 I'd generally ask not to resolve conversations without giving the original commenter feedback

Author: the section that follows this heading is specifically about Git and version control systems, so I prefer to keep the current heading. I've added the "Best Practices" suggestion to the above-the-fold text.

Version control systems have always been an important part of professional
software development, but the development of [git] over a decade ago and a
short while later [GitHub] has made version control mainstream for open source
projects.

> While a lot of tutorials focus on using git from the command line, we have found

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While many tutorials focus on using git from the command line, we have found
```

> While a lot of tutorials focus on using git from the command line, we have found

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While a lot of tutorials focus on using Git from the command line, we have found
```

> While a lot of tutorials focus on using git from the command line, we have found

Author: merging the suggestions because GitHub can't do it on its own... 😅 

```suggestion
While many tutorials focus on using Git from the command line, we have found
```

that using a graphical user interface to visualize the history graph can make
it quite a bit easier for beginners to understand what is going on. One good

> example of such a tool is [Fork], which is freely available for Windows and Mac:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
example of such a tool is [Fork], which is freely available for Windows and macOS:
```

![Screenshot of Fork](/images/posts/2018-11-27-open-source-maintenance/git-fork.png)

> When working on multiple different projects it is very useful to rely on similar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When working on multiple different projects, it is useful to rely on similar
```

> conventions, for example when naming things. In the context of git this is most

Reviewer: ```suggestion
conventions, for example, when naming things. In the context of Git this is most
```

relevant when naming [remotes](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Working-with-Remotes)
and branches.

For branches we use the default `master` branch as our main development branch.
Feature branches are named after the thing that they are implementing or fixing
and ideally only contain isolated, focused changes. If we publish new releases

> we "tag" the release commits with a tag name like `v1.2.3`, corresponding to

Author: I usually use `npm/yarn version` for that. yeah, might be valuable to mention that somewhere 🤔

> we "tag" the release commits with a tag name like `v1.2.3`, corresponding to

Reviewer 3: I'm pretty sure np uses npm/yarn version under the hood, but it also does a few other things that stop me shooting myself in the foot all the time 😂

reasons why we love [Ember.js], because it comes with a great testing system
out-of-the-box and allows us to write tests for all of the critical parts of
the apps that we develop.

You can find more information on testing in Ember.js on the official
[guides](https://guides.emberjs.com/release/testing/).

But this topic not limited to just Ember.js, other ecosystems have similar
tools. For Node.js the most popular testing solutions these days are [Jest]
and [Mocha]. In the [Rust] ecosystem testing is already built into their
package manager [cargo], but there are [plenty of crates](https://github.com/rust-unofficial/awesome-rust#testing)
to make testing even more pleasant, including the very valuable [proptest]
crate.

#### Linting

Similar to testing frameworks, a lot of ecosystems have tools to run "static
analysis" on your code to find bugs before you even run the applications. These
tools are often called "Linters".

Very popular in the JavaScript world is [ESLint], which we often run in
combination with [Prettier], to also ensure that our code is formatted in a
consistent way.

Again, similar tools exist for example for Rust ([clippy] and [rustfmt]) and

> Python ([pyflakes] and [black]).

Reviewer 2: Would be good to mention the `mix format [--check-formatted]` task for Elixir as well (could also be instead of Python that we don't really have a connection with).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Elixir (`mix format [--check-formatted]`).
```

#### Continuous Integration

The above points about testing and linting are nice to have, but if nobody runs
your tests then they don't provide any value. This is where continuous
integration (or short "CI") systems come into play. These kinds of systems are
coupled to your version control servers and automatically run linting checks and
tests whenever you upload new commits to the server.

Most of the time we use [TravisCI] for this purpose, which is coupled to GitHub,
free for open source projects, and supports Linux, Mac and soon Windows too.
Alternatives include [CircleCI] (based on Docker images) and [AppVeyor], which
we currently use to test Windows support on projects where this is relevant.

One important thing to mention here is that CI can not only run your test suite
but can often also do other things like publishing new versions of your
projects. On most of our projects we have configured TravisCI to automatically

> publish new releases to [npm] whenever we push a new git tag to the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
publish new releases to [npm] whenever we push a new Git tag to the server.
```

You can find instruction on how to configure this in their official

> [documentation](https://docs.travis-ci.com/user/deployment/npm/).

Author: It's a matter of trade-offs. The recent situation wouldn't have been prevented by forbidding auto-deploy or 2FA, because the keys to the kingdom were deliberately passed over. At the same time there is also a security risk involved in giving npm ownership to a large number of developers (compared to only a single account for CI). Another risk is publishing some private files in the repo (e.g. `.env` with secret keys) if `.npmignore` (or `files` in `package.json`) is not set up properly.

#### Semantic Versioning

Semantic Versioning (or short "semver") is a way to assign meaning to version
numbers, and specifically to version number changes. The official
[specification](https://semver.org/) is a little longer, but there are five
important rules:

1. version numbers have three main parts called major, minor and patch version
   (Example: `v3.0.1`, major is `3`, minor is `0` and patch version is `1`)
2. when your release includes any changes that might break the apps of existing
   users you should increase the **major** version
3. when your release includes only bug fixes you should increase the **patch**
   version
4. for all other changes you should increase the **minor** version
5. if your version is below `v1.0.0` (e.g. `v0.4.3`) you can release breaking
   changes without increasing the major version because the project is
   considered "unstable"

Since the majority of package managers including [npm], [yarn], [cargo] and

> [pip] follow these semantics when resolving dependencies, it is very important

Reviewer 2: would be good to include https://hex.pm as well - again, could be instead of pip

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[hex](https://hex.pm) follow these semantics when resolving dependencies, it is very important
```

to comply with these rules. But they are also useful in order for your users
to get a sense of what they can expect from a new release.

While this can be controversial, we consider dropping support for older Node.js,

> Python, Ruby, or other language releases a breaking change. This means that if

Reviewer 2: having Elixir (and maybe Rust) in here would be good, I'd replace Python with it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Elixir, Ruby, Rust, or other language releases a breaking change. This means that if
```

your package [declares](https://docs.npmjs.com/files/package.json#engines)
that it works with Node.js 4, and you release a new version that needs at least
Node.js 6, then you should increase the **major** version.

#### Dependency Update Services

Any sufficiently large open source project has at least a few dependencies that
it is built upon, and even smaller projects typically have at least a dependency
on a test framework. While keeping the dependencies of a single project
up-to-date is a manageable task, it is becoming a full-time job once you

> maintain dozens or hundreds of separate projects.

Reviewer 4: Dozens or hundreds sounds ambitious to me, which might detract from the point, like I should only consider dependency update service once I pass the 50 OSS project mark :trollface: . 
Maybe:
> While keeping the dependencies of a single  project up-to-date is  a manageable task, it quickly becomes a full-time job once you maintain multiple separate projects.

Author: https://github.com/Turbo87?tab=repositories ... tell me about it 😆 

but yeah, I see what you mean. will update that phrasing.

Fortunately for us this is a task that can be automated quite well, at least
if you have a good test suite and continuous integration set up. While we
first used [Greenkeeper] for this task, we have lately transitioned to using
[dependabot], which supports not only npm, but all sorts of different package
managers, language ecosystems, and even monorepos.

> The way this work is that dependabot will automatically open Pull Requests on

Reviewer 2: _"…this work**s**…"_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The way this works is that dependabot will automatically open Pull Requests on
```

> The way this works is that dependabot will automatically open Pull Requests on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dependabot will automatically open Pull Requests on
```

> your projects, whenever one of your dependencies has published a new version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
your projects whenever one of your dependencies has published a new version.
```

that lists all your released versions including the changes that went into
each release.

It can be quite tedious to write these things by hand, but fortunately there
are generators that can do most of the work for us. These generators can be
divided into two groups:

1. the first group is based on [semantic commit messages](https://seesparkbox.com/foundry/semantic_commit_messages)
   and lists all of the commits that are part of a certain release
2. the second group is based upon GitHub Pull Requests (or similar) and uses
   issue/PR labels to categorize changes

While "semantic commit messages" seem to be quite popular we prefer the second
group of changelog generators, as listing each commit often results in a long
list of very fine-grained changes that are not directly helpful to the user.

Instead we use [lerna-changelog] to generate our changelogs from all of the
merged pull requests that went into each of the releases. To make this work
properly it is important to focus each pull request on only one single, logical
change, and label it properly as either `enhancement`, `bug`, `breaking`, or
any of the other supported/configured labels. To ensure that all of our projects

> use the same set of labels we use [github-label-sync].

Reviewer 2: is this true? 😆

Reviewer 2: 👍 would be good to set up a simplabs/github-labels as well

Author: feel free to fork it. my set of labels happens to match the default labels of lerna-changelog. 😉 

see https://github.com/lerna/lerna-changelog/blob/master/src/configuration.ts#L53-L57
